Document pub workspaces (#6117)
dart-lang/site-www: src/content/guides/packages.md

[content hash]: /tools/pub/glossary#content-hashes

<a name="workspaces"></a>
## Pub Workspaces (Mono-repo Support)

When working on a project, you might develop multiple Dart packages in the same
version control repository (a mono-repo).

For example you might have a directory layout like: 

```console
/
  packages/
    shared/
      pubspec.yaml
      pubspec.lock
      .dart_tool/package_config.json
    client_package/
      pubspec.yaml
      pubspec.lock
      .dart_tool/package_config.json
    server_package/
      pubspec.yaml
      pubspec.lock
      .dart_tool/package_config.json
```

There are multiple issues with this organization:

> * You need to run `pub get` once for each package.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* You need to run `dart pub get` once for each package.
```

* You risk ending up with different versions of dependencies for each package.
  Leading to confusion when context switching between the packages.
* If you open the root folder in your IDE, the dart analyzer will have to have a
  separate analysis contexts for each package.

Pub allows you to organize your repository as a "workspace" using a single

> shared resolution for all your packages.
> 
> To create a workspace:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
shared resolution for all your packages.

:::note
Using a single shared dependency resolution for all your packages increases
the risks of dependency conflicts. Because Dart does not allow multiple versions
of the same package.

If the packages are going to be used together (as is commonly the case),
this is often a feature, as it forces you to resolve incompatibilities between your
packages when the arise, rather then when you start using the packages.
:::

To create a workspace:
```

* Add a `pubspec.yaml` at the repository root directory with a `workspace` entry
  enummerating the paths to the packages of the respository (the workspace
  packages):

```yaml

> name: _

Reviewer: ```suggestion
name: _
publish_to: none
```

environment:
  sdk: ^3.6.0
workspace:
  - packages/helper
  - packages/client_package
  - packages/server_package
```

> * For each of the existing `pubspec.yaml`s, make sure their sdk constraint is at

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* For each of the existing `pubspec.yaml`s, make sure their SDK constraint is at
```

  * Create a single `pubspec.lock` next to the root `pubspec.yaml` that contains
    the a resolution of all the `dependencies` and `dev_dependencies` of all the
    workspace packages. 
  * Create a single shared `.dart_tool/package_config.json` that maps package
    names to file locations.
  * Delete any other existing `pubspec.lock` and
    `.dart_tool/package_config.json` files next to workspace packages.

Now the file structure looks like this:

```console
/
  packages/
    shared/
      pubspec.yaml
    client_package/
      pubspec.yaml
    server_package/
      pubspec.yaml
  pubspec.yaml
  pubspec.lock
  .dart_tool/package_config.json
```

:::version-note
Pub workspaces was introduced in Dart 3.6.0.

To use pub workspaces, all your workspace packages (but not your dependencies)
must have a sdk version constraint of `^3.6.0` or higher.
:::

### Interdependencies between workspace packages

If any of the workspace packages depend on each other, they will automatically
resolve to the one in the workspace, regardless of the source.

Eg. `packages/client_package/pubspec.yaml` might depend on `shared`:

```yaml
dependencies:
  shared: 

>     hosted: https://pub.dev

Reviewer: I understand why you want to write `hosted: https://pub.dev`

But we actually don't allow that to be published to pub.dev.

We require that packages published to pub.dev has no URL when they are hosted.
We make this requirement because we are the default repository.

Author: Good point.

Not sure how to fix this best. Changing it to a custom repository or a git-dependency seems distracting.

Reviewer: Just writing `shared: ^1.0.0` might be okay.

Author: Done

    version: ^2.3.0
```

When resolved inside the workspace, the _local_ version of `shared` will be
used. 

The local version of `shared` would still have to match the constraint
(`^2.3.0`) though.

But when the package is consumed as a dependency without being part of the
workspace, the original source (here `hosted`) is used.

So if `client_package` is published to pub.dev and someone depends on it, they
will get the hosted version of `shared` as a transitive dependency.

### Dependency overrides in a workspace

All `dependency_overrides:` sections in the workspace packages are respected,
and you can also place a `pubspec_overrides.yaml` file next to any of the
workspace `pubspec.yaml` files.

> You can only override a package once in the workspace.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can only override a package once in the workspace. To keep overrides organized
it can be preferable to keep `dependency_overrides` in the root `pubspec.yaml`.
```

[content hash]: /tools/pub/glossary#content-hashes

> <a name="workspaces"></a>

Author: Fine by me!

> <a name="workspaces"></a>

Author: I've moved it to its own page. Hope it makes sense

> ## Pub Workspaces (Mono-repo Support)

Reviewer 2: Actually now I'm seeing others on the team say mono-repo, I'm not sure which we should use but I think we need a team consensus!

When working on a project, you might develop multiple Dart packages in the same

> version control repository (a mono-repo).

Author: Done

For example you might have a directory layout like: 

```console
/
  packages/
    shared/
      pubspec.yaml
      pubspec.lock
      .dart_tool/package_config.json
    client_package/
      pubspec.yaml
      pubspec.lock
      .dart_tool/package_config.json
    server_package/
      pubspec.yaml
      pubspec.lock
      .dart_tool/package_config.json
```

There are some downsides to this setup:

* You need to run `dart pub get` once for each package.
* You risk ending up with different versions of dependencies for each package.
  Leading to confusion when context switching between the packages.
* If you open the root folder in your IDE, the dart analyzer will have to have a
  separate analysis contexts for each package (increasing memory usage).

> Pub allows you to organize your repository as a "workspace" using a single

Author: Done

shared resolution for all your packages.

:::note
Using a single shared dependency resolution for all your packages increases
the risks of dependency conflicts. Because Dart does not allow multiple versions
of the same package.

If the packages are going to be used together (as is commonly the case),
this is often a feature, as it forces you to resolve incompatibilities between your

> packages when the arise, rather then when you start using the packages.

Reviewer 3: Should this be "when **they** arise"?

Author: Yep - thanks!

> packages when the arise, rather then when you start using the packages.

Author: ```suggestion
packages when they arise, rather then when you start using the packages.
```

:::

To create a workspace:

* Add a `pubspec.yaml` at the repository root directory with a `workspace` entry
  enummerating the paths to the packages of the respository (the workspace
  packages):

```yaml
name: _
publish_to: none
environment:
  sdk: ^3.6.0
workspace:
  - packages/helper
  - packages/client_package
  - packages/server_package
```

* For each of the existing `pubspec.yaml`s, make sure their SDK constraint is at
  least `^3.6.0` and add a `resolution` entry:

  ```yaml
  environment:
    sdk: ^3.6.0
  resolution: workspace
  ```

> * Run `dart pub get` anywhere in the repository, and this will:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Run `dart pub get` anywhere in the repository. This will:
```

  * Create a single `pubspec.lock` next to the root `pubspec.yaml` that contains
    the a resolution of all the `dependencies` and `dev_dependencies` of all the
    workspace packages. 
  * Create a single shared `.dart_tool/package_config.json` that maps package
    names to file locations.
  * Delete any other existing `pubspec.lock` and
    `.dart_tool/package_config.json` files next to workspace packages.

Now the file structure looks like this:

```console
/
  packages/
    shared/
      pubspec.yaml
    client_package/
      pubspec.yaml
    server_package/
      pubspec.yaml
  pubspec.yaml
  pubspec.lock
  .dart_tool/package_config.json
```

:::version-note
Pub workspaces was introduced in Dart 3.6.0.

To use pub workspaces, all your workspace packages (but not your dependencies)
must have a SDK version constraint of `^3.6.0` or higher.
:::

### Interdependencies between workspace packages

If any of the workspace packages depend on each other, they will automatically

> resolve to the one in the workspace, regardless of the source.

Reviewer 2: Can you explain this differently? It sounds confusing to me "If _any of the workspace packages_ depend _on each other_..." makes it sounds like there's packages A and B and in the workspace, and A depends on B and B depends on A. But then the resolution is "...they will automatically resolve to the one in the workspace..." -- I thought they are both in the workspace though, right? Which resolves to which? 

I understand the example given in rest of this section, but this introduction sounds like it's talking about a different situation, maybe? Hope it's not too much trouble to explain again, thank you!

Eg. `packages/client_package/pubspec.yaml` might depend on `shared`:

```yaml
dependencies:
  shared: ^2.3.0
```

When resolved inside the workspace, the _local_ version of `shared` will be
used. 

The local version of `shared` would still have to match the constraint
(`^2.3.0`) though.

But when the package is consumed as a dependency without being part of the
workspace, the original source (here implicitly `hosted`) is used.

So if `client_package` is published to pub.dev and someone depends on it, they

> will get the hosted version of `shared` as a transitive dependency.

Reviewer 2: Should this mention of "hosted" also be code-fonted, like the previous paragraph's mention? Or are you just saying that it _is_ hosted, not that that's a package name or anything like that?

```suggestion
will get the `hosted` version of `shared` as a transitive dependency.
```

### Dependency overrides in a workspace

> All `dependency_overrides:` sections in the workspace packages are respected,
> and you can also place a `pubspec_overrides.yaml` file next to any of the

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
All `dependency_overrides` sections in the workspace packages are respected.
You can also place a `pubspec_overrides.yaml` file next to any of the
```

workspace `pubspec.yaml` files.

> You can only override a package once in the workspace. To keep overrides organized
> it can be preferable to keep `dependency_overrides` in the root `pubspec.yaml`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You can only override a package once in the workspace. To keep overrides organized,
it's preferable to keep `dependency_overrides` in the root `pubspec.yaml`.
```

### Running a command in a specific workspace package

Some pub commands, such as `dart pub add`, and `dart pub publish` operate on a
"current" package. You can either change directory, or use `-C` to point pub at
a directory:

```console
$ dart pub -C packages/client_package publish
# Same as
$ cd packages/client_package ; dart pub publish ; cd -
```

### Temporarily resolving a package outside its workspace:

> Sometimes you might want to resolve a workspace package on its own, eg. to
> validate its dependency constraints.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Sometimes you might want to resolve a workspace package on its own,
for example, to validate its dependency constraints.
```

Author: Done

One way to do this is to create a `pubspec_overides.yaml` file that resets the

> `resolution:` setting. Like:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
`resolution` setting, like so:
```

Author: Done
